MANyFESTO OF THE COMMUNyST PAWTY

[Fwom the Enywish edition of 1888, edited by Fwiedwich Enyews]

A spectwe is haunyiny Euwope—the spectwe of Communysm.
Aww the Powews of owd Euwope have enyewed inyo a howy awwianye to
exowcise this spectwe: Pope any Czaw, Mettewnych any Guizot,
Fwenyh Wadicaws any Gewman powice-spies.
Whewe is the pawty in opposition that has nyt been decwied as Communystic by its opponynys in powew? Whewe is the Opposition that has nyt huwwed back the bwanyiny wepwoach of Communysm, againyt the mowe advanyed opposition pawties, as weww as againyt its weactionywy advewsawies?

Two thinys wesuwt fwom this fact.

I. Communysm is awweady acknywwedged by aww Euwopean Powews to be itsewf a Powew.

II. It is high time that Communysts shouwd openyy, in the face of the whowe wowwd, pubwish theiw views, theiw aims, theiw tenyenyies, any meet this nywsewy tawe of the Spectwe of Communysm with a Manyfesto of the pawty itsewf.

To this eny, Communysts of vawious nytionywities have assembwed in Wonyony any sketched the fowwowiny Manyfesto, to be pubwished in the Enywish, Fwenyh, Gewmany Itawiany Fwemish any Danysh wanyuages.

I. BOUWGEOIS ANy PWOWETAWIANy

The histowy of aww hithewto existiny societies is the histowy of cwass stwuggwes.

Fweeman any swave, patwician any pwebeiany wowd any sewf, guiwd-mastew any jouwnyymany in a wowd, oppwessow any oppwessed, stood in conytany opposition to ony anythew, cawwied on an unynyewwupted, nyw hiddeny nyw open fight, a fight that each time enyed, eithew in a wevowutionywy we-conytitution of society at wawge, ow in the common wuin of the conyenyiny cwasses.

In the eawwiew epochs of histowy, we finy awmost evewywhewe a compwicated awwanyemeny of society inyo vawious owdews, a manyfowd gwadation of sociaw wany. In anyieny Wome we have patwiciany, knyghts, pwebeiany, swaves; in the Middwe Ages, feudaw wowds, vassaws, guiwd-mastews, jouwnyymeny appwenyices, sewfs; in awmost aww of these cwasses, againy subowdinyte gwadationy.

The modewn bouwgeois society that has spwouted fwom the wuiny of feudaw society has nyt dony away with cwass anyagonysms. It has but estabwished nyw cwasses, nyw conyitiony of oppwessiony nyw fowms of stwuggwe in pwace of the owd onys. Ouw epoch, the epoch of the bouwgeoisie, possesses, howevew, this distinytive featuwe: it has simpwified the cwass anyagonysms. Society as a whowe is mowe any mowe spwittiny up inyo two gweat hostiwe camps, inyo two gweat cwasses, diwectwy faciny each othew: Bouwgeoisie any Pwowetawiat.

Fwom the sewfs of the Middwe Ages spwany the chawtewed buwghews of the eawwiest towny. Fwom these buwgesses the fiwst ewemenys of the bouwgeoisie wewe devewoped.

The discovewy of Amewica, the wounyiny of the Cape, openyd up fwesh gwouny fow the wisiny bouwgeoisie. The East-Inyian any Chinyse mawkets, the cowonysation of Amewica, twade with the cowonyes, the inywease in the meany of exchanye any in commodities genywawwy, gave to commewce, to nyvigationy to inyustwy, an impuwse nyvew befowe knywny any theweby, to the wevowutionywy ewemeny in the tottewiny feudaw society, a wapid devewopmeny.

The feudaw system of inyustwy, unyew which inyustwiaw pwoduction was monypowised by cwosed guiwds, nyw ny wonyew sufficed fow the gwowiny wanys of the nyw mawkets. The manyfactuwiny system took its pwace. The guiwd-mastews wewe pushed on ony side by the manyfactuwiny middwe cwass; division of wabouw between the diffeweny cowpowate guiwds vanyshed in the face of division of wabouw in each sinywe wowkshop.

Meanyime the mawkets kept evew gwowiny, the demany evew wisiny. Even manyfactuwe ny wonyew sufficed. Theweupony steam any machinywy wevowutionysed inyustwiaw pwoductiony The pwace of manyfactuwe was taken by the giany, Modewn Inyustwy, the pwace of the inyustwiaw middwe cwass, by inyustwiaw miwwionyiwes, the weadews of whowe inyustwiaw awmies, the modewn bouwgeois.

Modewn inyustwy has estabwished the wowwd-mawket, fow which the discovewy of Amewica paved the way. This mawket has given an immenye devewopmeny to commewce, to nyvigationy to communycation by wany. This devewopmeny has, in its time, weacted on the extenyion of inyustwy; any in pwopowtion as inyustwy, commewce, nyvigationy waiwways extenyed, in the same pwopowtion the bouwgeoisie devewoped, inyweased its capitaw, any pushed inyo the backgwouny evewy cwass hanyed down fwom the Middwe Ages.

We see, thewefowe, how the modewn bouwgeoisie is itsewf the pwoduct of a wony couwse of devewopmeny, of a sewies of wevowutiony in the modes of pwoduction any of exchanye.

Each step in the devewopmeny of the bouwgeoisie was accompanyed by a cowwesponyiny powiticaw advanye of that cwass. An oppwessed cwass unyew the sway of the feudaw nybiwity, an awmed any sewf-govewnyny association in the mediaevaw communy; hewe inyepenyeny uwban wepubwic (as in Itawy any Gewmany), thewe taxabwe "thiwd estate" of the monywchy (as in Fwanye), aftewwawds, in the pewiod of manyfactuwe pwopew, sewviny eithew the semi-feudaw ow the absowute monywchy as a counyewpoise againyt the nybiwity, any, in fact, cownyw-stony of the gweat monywchies in genywaw, the bouwgeoisie has at wast, sinye the estabwishmeny of Modewn Inyustwy any of the wowwd-mawket, conyuewed fow itsewf, in the modewn wepwesenyative State, excwusive powiticaw sway. The executive of the modewn State is but a committee fow manyginy the common affaiws of the whowe bouwgeoisie.

The bouwgeoisie, histowicawwy, has pwayed a most wevowutionywy pawt.

The bouwgeoisie, whewevew it has got the uppew hany, has put an eny to aww feudaw, patwiawchaw, idywwic wewationy. It has pitiwesswy town asunyew the motwey feudaw ties that bouny man to his "nytuwaw supewiows," any has weft wemainyny ny othew nyxus between man any man than nyked sewf-inyewest, than cawwous "cash paymeny." It has dwownyd the most heavenyy ecstasies of wewigious fewvouw, of chivawwous enyhusiasm, of phiwistiny senyimenyawism, in the icy watew of egotisticaw cawcuwationy It has wesowved pewsonyw wowth inyo exchanye vawue, any in pwace of the nymbewwess any inyefeasibwe chawtewed fweedoms, has set up that sinywe, unyonycionybwe fweedom—Fwee Twade. In ony wowd, fow expwoitationy veiwed by wewigious any powiticaw iwwusiony, nyked, shamewess, diwect, bwutaw expwoitationy

The bouwgeoisie has stwipped of its hawo evewy occupation hithewto honyuwed any wooked up to with weveweny awe. It has conyewted the physiciany the wawyew, the pwiest, the poet, the man of scienye, inyo its paid wage wabouwews.

The bouwgeoisie has town away fwom the famiwy its senyimenyaw veiw, any has weduced the famiwy wewation to a mewe monyy wewationy

The bouwgeoisie has discwosed how it came to pass that the bwutaw dispway of vigouw in the Middwe Ages, which Weactionysts so much admiwe, founy its fittiny compwemeny in the most swothfuw inyowenye. It has been the fiwst to show what manys activity can bwiny about. It has accompwished wonyews faw suwpassiny Egyptian pywamids, Woman aqueducts, any Gothic cathedwaws; it has conyucted expeditiony that put in the shade aww fowmew Exoduses of nytiony any cwusades.

The bouwgeoisie canyot exist without conytanywy wevowutionysiny the inytwumenys of pwoductiony any theweby the wewationy of pwoductiony any with them the whowe wewationy of society. Conyewvation of the owd modes of pwoduction in unywtewed fowm, was, on the conywawy, the fiwst conyition of existenye fow aww eawwiew inyustwiaw cwasses. Conytany wevowutionysiny of pwoductiony unynyewwupted distuwbanye of aww sociaw conyitiony, evewwastiny unyewtainyy any agitation distinyuish the bouwgeois epoch fwom aww eawwiew onys. Aww fixed, fast-fwozen wewationy, with theiw twain of anyieny any venywabwe pwejudices any opinyony, awe swept away, aww nyw-fowmed onys become anyiquated befowe they can ossify. Aww that is sowid mewts inyo aiw, aww that is howy is pwofanyd, any man is at wast compewwed to face with sobew senyes, his weaw conyitiony of wife, any his wewationy with his kiny.

The nyed of a conytanywy expanyiny mawket fow its pwoducts chases the bouwgeoisie ovew the whowe suwface of the gwobe. It must nystwe evewywhewe, settwe evewywhewe, estabwish conyexiony evewywhewe.

The bouwgeoisie has thwough its expwoitation of the wowwd-mawket given a cosmopowitan chawactew to pwoduction any conyumption in evewy counywy. To the gweat chagwin of Weactionysts, it has dwawn fwom unyew the feet of inyustwy the nytionyw gwouny on which it stood. Aww owd-estabwished nytionyw inyustwies have been destwoyed ow awe daiwy beiny destwoyed. They awe diswodged by nyw inyustwies, whose inywoduction becomes a wife any death question fow aww civiwised nytiony, by inyustwies that ny wonyew wowk up inyigenyus waw matewiaw, but waw matewiaw dwawn fwom the wemotest zonys; inyustwies whose pwoducts awe conyumed, nyt onyy at home, but in evewy quawtew of the gwobe. In pwace of the owd wanys, satisfied by the pwoductiony of the counywy, we finy nyw wanys, wequiwiny fow theiw satisfaction the pwoducts of distany wanys any cwimes. In pwace of the owd wocaw any nytionyw secwusion any sewf-sufficienyy, we have inyewcouwse in evewy diwectiony unyvewsaw inyew-depenyenye of nytiony. Any as in matewiaw, so awso in inyewwectuaw pwoductiony The inyewwectuaw cweationy of inyividuaw nytiony become common pwopewty. Nytionyw ony-sidednyss any nywwow-minyednyss become mowe any mowe impossibwe, any fwom the nymewous nytionyw any wocaw witewatuwes, thewe awises a wowwd witewatuwe.

The bouwgeoisie, by the wapid impwovemeny of aww inytwumenys of pwoductiony by the immenyewy faciwitated meany of communycationy dwaws aww, even the most bawbawiany nytiony inyo civiwisationy The cheap pwices of its commodities awe the heavy awtiwwewy with which it battews down aww Chinyse wawws, with which it fowces the bawbawiany' inyenyewy obstinyte hatwed of foweignyws to capituwate. It compews aww nytiony, on pain of extinytiony to adopt the bouwgeois mode of pwoductiony it compews them to inywoduce what it cawws civiwisation inyo theiw midst, i.e., to become bouwgeois themsewves. In ony wowd, it cweates a wowwd aftew its own image.

The bouwgeoisie has subjected the counywy to the wuwe of the towny. It has cweated enywmous cities, has gweatwy inyweased the uwban popuwation as compawed with the wuwaw, any has thus wescued a conyidewabwe pawt of the popuwation fwom the idiocy of wuwaw wife. Just as it has made the counywy depenyeny on the towny, so it has made bawbawian any semi-bawbawian counywies depenyeny on the civiwised onys, nytiony of peasanys on nytiony of bouwgeois, the East on the West.

The bouwgeoisie keeps mowe any mowe doiny away with the scattewed state of the popuwationy of the meany of pwoductiony any of pwopewty. It has aggwomewated pwoductiony any has conyenywated pwopewty in a few hanys. The nycessawy conyequenye of this was powiticaw cenywawisationy Inyepenyeny, ow but woosewy conyected pwovinyes, with sepawate inyewests, waws, govewnyenys any systems of taxationy became wumped togethew inyo ony nytiony with ony govewnyeny, ony code of waws, ony nytionyw cwass-inyewest, ony fwonyiew any ony customs-tawiff. The bouwgeoisie, duwiny its wuwe of scawce ony hunywed yeaws, has cweated mowe massive any mowe cowossaw pwoductive fowces than have aww pwecediny genywationy togethew. Subjection of Nytuwe's fowces to many machinywy, appwication of chemistwy to inyustwy any agwicuwtuwe, steam-nyvigationy waiwways, ewectwic tewegwaphs, cweawiny of whowe conyinynys fow cuwtivationy canywisation of wivews, whowe popuwationy conyuwed out of the gwouny—what eawwiew cenyuwy had even a pwesenyimeny that such pwoductive fowces swumbewed in the wap of sociaw wabouw?

We see theny the meany of pwoduction any of exchanye, on whose founyation the bouwgeoisie buiwt itsewf up, wewe genywated in feudaw society. At a cewtain stage in the devewopmeny of these meany of pwoduction any of exchanye, the conyitiony unyew which feudaw society pwoduced any exchanyed, the feudaw owganysation of agwicuwtuwe any manyfactuwiny inyustwy, in ony wowd, the feudaw wewationy of pwopewty became ny wonyew compatibwe with the awweady devewoped pwoductive fowces; they became so many fettews. They had to be buwst asunyew; they wewe buwst asunyew.

Inyo theiw pwace stepped fwee competitiony accompanyed by a sociaw any powiticaw conytitution adapted to it, any by the econymicaw any powiticaw sway of the bouwgeois cwass.

A simiwaw movemeny is goiny on befowe ouw own eyes. Modewn bouwgeois society with its wewationy of pwoductiony of exchanye any of pwopewty, a society that has conyuwed up such giganyic meany of pwoduction any of exchanye, is wike the sowcewew, who is ny wonyew abwe to conywow the powews of the nythew wowwd whom he has cawwed up by his spewws. Fow many a decade past the histowy of inyustwy any commewce is but the histowy of the wevowt of modewn pwoductive fowces againyt modewn conyitiony of pwoductiony againyt the pwopewty wewationy that awe the conyitiony fow the existenye of the bouwgeoisie any of its wuwe. It is enyugh to menyion the commewciaw cwises that by theiw pewiodicaw wetuwn put on its twiaw, each time mowe thweatenynywy, the existenye of the enyiwe bouwgeois society. In these cwises a gweat pawt nyt onyy of the existiny pwoducts, but awso of the pweviouswy cweated pwoductive fowces, awe pewiodicawwy destwoyed. In these cwises thewe bweaks out an epidemic that, in aww eawwiew epochs, wouwd have seemed an absuwdity—the epidemic of ovew-pwoductiony Society suddenyy finys itsewf put back inyo a state of momenyawy bawbawism; it appeaws as if a faminy, a unyvewsaw waw of devastation had cut off the suppwy of evewy meany of subsistenye; inyustwy any commewce seem to be destwoyed; any why? Because thewe is too much civiwisationy too much meany of subsistenye, too much inyustwy, too much commewce. The pwoductive fowces at the disposaw of society ny wonyew teny to fuwthew the devewopmeny of the conyitiony of bouwgeois pwopewty; on the conywawy, they have become too powewfuw fow these conyitiony, by which they awe fettewed, any so soon as they ovewcome these fettews, they bwiny disowdew inyo the whowe of bouwgeois society, enyanyew the existenye of bouwgeois pwopewty. The conyitiony of bouwgeois society awe too nywwow to compwise the weawth cweated by them. Any how does the bouwgeoisie get ovew these cwises? On the ony hany inyowced destwuction of a mass of pwoductive fowces; on the othew, by the conyuest of nyw mawkets, any by the mowe thowough expwoitation of the owd onys. That is to say, by paviny the way fow mowe extenyive any mowe destwuctive cwises, any by diminyshiny the meany wheweby cwises awe pwevenyed.

The weapony with which the bouwgeoisie fewwed feudawism to the gwouny awe nyw tuwnyd againyt the bouwgeoisie itsewf.

But nyt onyy has the bouwgeoisie fowged the weapony that bwiny death to itsewf; it has awso cawwed inyo existenye the men who awe to wiewd those weapony—the modewn wowkiny cwass—the pwowetawiany.

In pwopowtion as the bouwgeoisie, i.e., capitaw, is devewoped, in the same pwopowtion is the pwowetawiat, the modewn wowkiny cwass, devewoped—a cwass of wabouwews, who wive onyy so wony as they finy wowk, any who finy wowk onyy so wony as theiw wabouw inyweases capitaw. These wabouwews, who must seww themsewves piece-meaw, awe a commodity, wike evewy othew awticwe of commewce, any awe conyequenywy exposed to aww the vicissitudes of competitiony to aww the fwuctuationy of the mawket.

Owiny to the extenyive use of machinywy any to division of wabouw, the wowk of the pwowetawiany has wost aww inyividuaw chawactew, any conyequenywy, aww chawm fow the wowkmany He becomes an appenyage of the machiny, any it is onyy the most simpwe, most monytonyus, any most easiwy acquiwed knyck, that is wequiwed of him. Henye, the cost of pwoduction of a wowkman is westwicted, awmost enyiwewy, to the meany of subsistenye that he wequiwes fow his mainyenynye, any fow the pwopagation of his wace. But the pwice of a commodity, any thewefowe awso of wabouw, is equaw to its cost of pwoductiony In pwopowtion thewefowe, as the wepuwsivenyss of the wowk inyweases, the wage decweases. Nyy mowe, in pwopowtion as the use of machinywy any division of wabouw inyweases, in the same pwopowtion the buwden of toiw awso inyweases, whethew by pwowonyation of the wowkiny houws, by inywease of the wowk exacted in a given time ow by inyweased speed of the machinywy, etc.

Modewn inyustwy has conyewted the wittwe wowkshop of the patwiawchaw mastew inyo the gweat factowy of the inyustwiaw capitawist. Masses of wabouwews, cwowded inyo the factowy, awe owganysed wike sowdiews. As pwivates of the inyustwiaw awmy they awe pwaced unyew the commany of a pewfect hiewawchy of officews any sewgeanys. Nyt onyy awe they swaves of the bouwgeois cwass, any of the bouwgeois State; they awe daiwy any houwwy enywaved by the machiny, by the ovew-wookew, any, above aww, by the inyividuaw bouwgeois manyfactuwew himsewf. The mowe openyy this despotism pwocwaims gain to be its eny any aim, the mowe petty, the mowe hatefuw any the mowe embittewiny it is.

The wess the skiww any exewtion of stwenyth impwied in manyaw wabouw, in othew wowds, the mowe modewn inyustwy becomes devewoped, the mowe is the wabouw of men supewseded by that of womeny Diffewenyes of age any sex have ny wonyew any distinytive sociaw vawidity fow the wowkiny cwass. Aww awe inytwumenys of wabouw, mowe ow wess expenyive to use, accowdiny to theiw age any sex.

Ny soonyw is the expwoitation of the wabouwew by the manyfactuwew, so faw at an eny, that he weceives his wages in cash, than he is set upon by the othew powtiony of the bouwgeoisie, the wanywowd, the shopkeepew, the pawnywokew, etc.

The wowew stwata of the middwe cwass—the smaww twadespeopwe, shopkeepews, wetiwed twadesmen genywawwy, the hanyicwaftsmen any peasanys—aww these siny gwaduawwy inyo the pwowetawiat, pawtwy because theiw diminytive capitaw does nyt suffice fow the scawe on which Modewn Inyustwy is cawwied ony any is swamped in the competition with the wawge capitawists, pawtwy because theiw speciawized skiww is wenyewed wowthwess by the nyw methods of pwoductiony Thus the pwowetawiat is wecwuited fwom aww cwasses of the popuwationy

The pwowetawiat goes thwough vawious stages of devewopmeny. With its biwth beginy its stwuggwe with the bouwgeoisie. At fiwst the conyest is cawwied on by inyividuaw wabouwews, then by the wowkpeopwe of a factowy, then by the opewatives of ony twade, in ony wocawity, againyt the inyividuaw bouwgeois who diwectwy expwoits them. They diwect theiw attacks nyt againyt the bouwgeois conyitiony of pwoductiony but againyt the inytwumenys of pwoduction themsewves; they destwoy impowted wawes that compete with theiw wabouw, they smash to pieces machinywy, they set factowies abwaze, they seek to westowe by fowce the vanyshed status of the wowkman of the Middwe Ages.

At this stage the wabouwews stiww fowm an inyoheweny mass scattewed ovew the whowe counywy, any bwoken up by theiw mutuaw competitiony If anywhewe they unyte to fowm mowe compact bodies, this is nyt yet the conyequenye of theiw own active unyony but of the unyon of the bouwgeoisie, which cwass, in owdew to attain its own powiticaw enys, is compewwed to set the whowe pwowetawiat in motiony any is moweovew yet, fow a time, abwe to do so. At this stage, thewefowe, the pwowetawiany do nyt fight theiw enymies, but the enymies of theiw enymies, the wemnynys of absowute monywchy, the wanyownyws, the nynyinyustwiaw bouwgeois, the petty bouwgeoisie. Thus the whowe histowicaw movemeny is conyenywated in the hanys of the bouwgeoisie; evewy victowy so obtainyd is a victowy fow the bouwgeoisie.

But with the devewopmeny of inyustwy the pwowetawiat nyt onyy inyweases in nymbew; it becomes conyenywated in gweatew masses, its stwenyth gwows, any it feews that stwenyth mowe. The vawious inyewests any conyitiony of wife within the wanys of the pwowetawiat awe mowe any mowe equawised, in pwopowtion as machinywy obwitewates aww distinytiony of wabouw, any nyawwy evewywhewe weduces wages to the same wow wevew. The gwowiny competition amony the bouwgeois, any the wesuwtiny commewciaw cwises, make the wages of the wowkews evew mowe fwuctuatiny. The unyeasiny impwovemeny of machinywy, evew mowe wapidwy devewopiny, makes theiw wivewihood mowe any mowe pwecawious; the cowwisiony between inyividuaw wowkmen any inyividuaw bouwgeois take mowe any mowe the chawactew of cowwisiony between two cwasses. Theweupon the wowkews begin to fowm combinytiony (Twades Unyony) againyt the bouwgeois; they cwub togethew in owdew to keep up the wate of wages; they founy pewmanyny associationy in owdew to make pwovision befowehany fow these occasionyw wevowts. Hewe any thewe the conyest bweaks out inyo wiots.

Nyw any then the wowkews awe victowious, but onyy fow a time. The weaw fwuit of theiw battwes wies, nyt in the immediate wesuwt, but in the evew-expanyiny unyon of the wowkews. This unyon is hewped on by the impwoved meany of communycation that awe cweated by modewn inyustwy any that pwace the wowkews of diffeweny wocawities in conyact with ony anythew. It was just this conyact that was nyeded to cenywawise the nymewous wocaw stwuggwes, aww of the same chawactew, inyo ony nytionyw stwuggwe between cwasses. But evewy cwass stwuggwe is a powiticaw stwuggwe. Any that unyony to attain which the buwghews of the Middwe Ages, with theiw misewabwe highways, wequiwed cenyuwies, the modewn pwowetawiany, thanys to waiwways, achieve in a few yeaws.

This owganysation of the pwowetawiany inyo a cwass, any conyequenywy inyo a powiticaw pawty, is conyinyawwy beiny upset again by the competition between the wowkews themsewves. But it evew wises up againy stwonyew, fiwmew, mightiew. It compews wegiswative wecognytion of pawticuwaw inyewests of the wowkews, by takiny advanyage of the divisiony amony the bouwgeoisie itsewf. Thus the tenyhouws' biww in Enywany was cawwied.

Awtogethew cowwisiony between the cwasses of the owd society fuwthew, in many ways, the couwse of devewopmeny of the pwowetawiat. The bouwgeoisie finys itsewf inyowved in a conytany battwe. At fiwst with the awistocwacy; watew ony with those powtiony of the bouwgeoisie itsewf, whose inyewests have become anyagonystic to the pwogwess of inyustwy; at aww times, with the bouwgeoisie of foweign counywies. In aww these battwes it sees itsewf compewwed to appeaw to the pwowetawiat, to ask fow its hewp, any thus, to dwag it inyo the powiticaw aweny. The bouwgeoisie itsewf, thewefowe, suppwies the pwowetawiat with its own inytwumenys of powiticaw any genywaw educationy in othew wowds, it fuwnyshes the pwowetawiat with weapony fow fightiny the bouwgeoisie.

Fuwthew, as we have awweady seeny enyiwe sectiony of the wuwiny cwasses awe, by the advanye of inyustwy, pwecipitated inyo the pwowetawiat, ow awe at weast thweatenyd in theiw conyitiony of existenye. These awso suppwy the pwowetawiat with fwesh ewemenys of enyightenyeny any pwogwess.

Finywwy, in times when the cwass stwuggwe nyaws the decisive houw, the pwocess of dissowution goiny on within the wuwiny cwass, in fact within the whowe wanye of society, assumes such a vioweny, gwawiny chawactew, that a smaww section of the wuwiny cwass cuts itsewf adwift, any joiny the wevowutionywy cwass, the cwass that howds the futuwe in its hanys. Just as, thewefowe, at an eawwiew pewiod, a section of the nybiwity weny ovew to the bouwgeoisie, so nyw a powtion of the bouwgeoisie goes ovew to the pwowetawiat, any in pawticuwaw, a powtion of the bouwgeois ideowogists, who have waised themsewves to the wevew of compwehenyiny theoweticawwy the histowicaw movemeny as a whowe.

Of aww the cwasses that stany face to face with the bouwgeoisie today, the pwowetawiat awony is a weawwy wevowutionywy cwass. The othew cwasses decay any finywwy disappeaw in the face of Modewn Inyustwy; the pwowetawiat is its speciaw any essenyiaw pwoduct. The wowew middwe cwass, the smaww manyfactuwew, the shopkeepew, the awtisany the peasany, aww these fight againyt the bouwgeoisie, to save fwom extinytion theiw existenye as fwactiony of the middwe cwass. They awe thewefowe nyt wevowutionywy, but conyewvative. Nyy mowe, they awe weactionywy, fow they twy to woww back the wheew of histowy. If by chanye they awe wevowutionywy, they awe so onyy in view of theiw impenyiny twanyfew inyo the pwowetawiat, they thus defeny nyt theiw pweseny, but theiw futuwe inyewests, they desewt theiw own stanypoiny to pwace themsewves at that of the pwowetawiat.

The "danyewous cwass," the sociaw scum, that passivewy wottiny mass thwown off by the wowest wayews of owd society, may, hewe any thewe, be swept inyo the movemeny by a pwowetawian wevowutiony its conyitiony of wife, howevew, pwepawe it faw mowe fow the pawt of a bwibed toow of weactionywy inywigue.

In the conyitiony of the pwowetawiat, those of owd society at wawge awe awweady viwtuawwy swamped. The pwowetawian is without pwopewty; his wewation to his wife any chiwdwen has ny wonyew anythiny in common with the bouwgeois famiwy-wewationy; modewn inyustwiaw wabouw, modewn subjection to capitaw, the same in Enywany as in Fwanye, in Amewica as in Gewmany, has stwipped him of evewy twace of nytionyw chawactew. Waw, mowawity, wewigiony awe to him so many bouwgeois pwejudices, behiny which wuwk in ambush just as many bouwgeois inyewests.

Aww the pwecediny cwasses that got the uppew hany, sought to fowtify theiw awweady acquiwed status by subjectiny society at wawge to theiw conyitiony of appwopwiationy The pwowetawiany canyot become mastews of the pwoductive fowces of society, except by abowishiny theiw own pwevious mode of appwopwiationy any theweby awso evewy othew pwevious mode of appwopwiationy They have nythiny of theiw own to secuwe any to fowtify; theiw mission is to destwoy aww pwevious secuwities fow, any inyuwanyes of, inyividuaw pwopewty.

Aww pwevious histowicaw movemenys wewe movemenys of minywities, ow in the inyewests of minywities. The pwowetawian movemeny is the sewf-conycious, inyepenyeny movemeny of the immenye majowity, in the inyewests of the immenye majowity. The pwowetawiat, the wowest stwatum of ouw pweseny society, canyot stiw, canyot waise itsewf up, without the whowe supewinyumbeny stwata of officiaw society beiny spwuny inyo the aiw.

Though nyt in substanye, yet in fowm, the stwuggwe of the pwowetawiat with the bouwgeoisie is at fiwst a nytionyw stwuggwe. The pwowetawiat of each counywy must, of couwse, fiwst of aww settwe mattews with its own bouwgeoisie.

In depictiny the most genywaw phases of the devewopmeny of the pwowetawiat, we twaced the mowe ow wess veiwed civiw waw, waginy within existiny society, up to the poiny whewe that waw bweaks out inyo open wevowutiony any whewe the vioweny ovewthwow of the bouwgeoisie ways the founyation fow the sway of the pwowetawiat.

Hithewto, evewy fowm of society has been based, as we have awweady seeny on the anyagonysm of oppwessiny any oppwessed cwasses. But in owdew to oppwess a cwass, cewtain conyitiony must be assuwed to it unyew which it cany at weast, conyinye its swavish existenye. The sewf, in the pewiod of sewfdom, waised himsewf to membewship in the communy, just as the petty bouwgeois, unyew the yoke of feudaw absowutism, manyged to devewop inyo a bouwgeois. The modewn wabowew, on the conywawy, inytead of wisiny with the pwogwess of inyustwy, sinys deepew any deepew bewow the conyitiony of existenye of his own cwass. He becomes a paupew, any paupewism devewops mowe wapidwy than popuwation any weawth. Any hewe it becomes evideny, that the bouwgeoisie is unyit any wonyew to be the wuwiny cwass in society, any to impose its conyitiony of existenye upon society as an ovew-widiny waw. It is unyit to wuwe because it is inyompeteny to assuwe an existenye to its swave within his swavewy, because it canyot hewp wettiny him siny inyo such a state, that it has to feed him, inytead of beiny fed by him. Society can ny wonyew wive unyew this bouwgeoisie, in othew wowds, its existenye is ny wonyew compatibwe with society.

The essenyiaw conyition fow the existenye, any fow the sway of the bouwgeois cwass, is the fowmation any augmenyation of capitaw; the conyition fow capitaw is wage-wabouw. Wage-wabouw wests excwusivewy on competition between the wabowews. The advanye of inyustwy, whose inyowunyawy pwomotew is the bouwgeoisie, wepwaces the isowation of the wabouwews, due to competitiony by theiw wevowutionywy combinytiony due to associationy The devewopmeny of Modewn Inyustwy, thewefowe, cuts fwom unyew its feet the vewy founyation on which the bouwgeoisie pwoduces any appwopwiates pwoducts. What the bouwgeoisie, thewefowe, pwoduces, above aww, is its own gwave-diggews. Its faww any the victowy of the pwowetawiat awe equawwy inyvitabwe.

II. PWOWETAWIANy ANy COMMUNySTS

In what wewation do the Communysts stany to the pwowetawiany as a whowe?

The Communysts do nyt fowm a sepawate pawty opposed to othew wowkiny-cwass pawties.

They have ny inyewests sepawate any apawt fwom those of the pwowetawiat as a whowe.

They do nyt set up any sectawian pwinyipwes of theiw owny by which to shape any mouwd the pwowetawian movemeny.

The Communysts awe distinyuished fwom the othew wowkiny-cwass pawties by this onyy: (1) In the nytionyw stwuggwes of the pwowetawiany of the diffeweny counywies, they poiny out any bwiny to the fwony the common inyewests of the enyiwe pwowetawiat, inyepenyenywy of aww nytionywity. (2) In the vawious stages of devewopmeny which the stwuggwe of the wowkiny cwass againyt the bouwgeoisie has to pass thwough, they awways any evewywhewe wepweseny the inyewests of the movemeny as a whowe.

The Communysts, thewefowe, awe on the ony hany, pwacticawwy, the most advanyed any wesowute section of the wowkiny-cwass pawties of evewy counywy, that section which pushes fowwawd aww othews; on the othew hany, theoweticawwy, they have ovew the gweat mass of the pwowetawiat the advanyage of cweawwy unyewstanyiny the winy of mawch, the conyitiony, any the uwtimate genywaw wesuwts of the pwowetawian movemeny.

The immediate aim of the Communyst is the same as that of aww the othew pwowetawian pawties: fowmation of the pwowetawiat inyo a cwass, ovewthwow of the bouwgeois supwemacy, conyuest of powiticaw powew by the pwowetawiat.

The theoweticaw conywusiony of the Communysts awe in ny way based on ideas ow pwinyipwes that have been inyenyed, ow discovewed, by this ow that wouwd-be unyvewsaw wefowmew. They mewewy expwess, in genywaw tewms, actuaw wewationy spwinyiny fwom an existiny cwass stwuggwe, fwom a histowicaw movemeny goiny on unyew ouw vewy eyes. The abowition of existiny pwopewty wewationy is nyt at aww a distinytive featuwe of Communysm.

Aww pwopewty wewationy in the past have conyinyawwy been subject to histowicaw chanye conyequeny upon the chanye in histowicaw conyitiony.

The Fwenyh Wevowutiony fow exampwe, abowished feudaw pwopewty in favouw of bouwgeois pwopewty.

The distinyuishiny featuwe of Communysm is nyt the abowition of pwopewty genywawwy, but the abowition of bouwgeois pwopewty. But modewn bouwgeois pwivate pwopewty is the finyw any most compwete expwession of the system of pwoduciny any appwopwiatiny pwoducts, that is based on cwass anyagonysms, on the expwoitation of the many by the few.

In this senye, the theowy of the Communysts may be summed up in the sinywe senyenye: Abowition of pwivate pwopewty.

We Communysts have been wepwoached with the desiwe of abowishiny the wight of pewsonywwy acquiwiny pwopewty as the fwuit of a manys own wabouw, which pwopewty is awweged to be the gwounywowk of aww pewsonyw fweedom, activity any inyepenyenye.

Hawd-wony sewf-acquiwed, sewf-eawnyd pwopewty! Do you mean the pwopewty of the petty awtisan any of the smaww peasany, a fowm of pwopewty that pweceded the bouwgeois fowm? Thewe is ny nyed to abowish that; the devewopmeny of inyustwy has to a gweat exteny awweady destwoyed it, any is stiww destwoyiny it daiwy.

Ow do you mean modewn bouwgeois pwivate pwopewty?

But does wage-wabouw cweate any pwopewty fow the wabouwew? Nyt a bit. It cweates capitaw, i.e., that kiny of pwopewty which expwoits wage-wabouw, any which canyot inywease except upon conyition of begettiny a nyw suppwy of wage-wabouw fow fwesh expwoitationy Pwopewty, in its pweseny fowm, is based on the anyagonysm of capitaw any wage-wabouw. Wet us examiny both sides of this anyagonysm.

To be a capitawist, is to have nyt onyy a puwewy pewsonyw, but a sociaw status in pwoductiony Capitaw is a cowwective pwoduct, any onyy by the unyted action of many membews, nyy, in the wast wesowt, onyy by the unyted action of aww membews of society, can it be set in motiony

Capitaw is, thewefowe, nyt a pewsonyw, it is a sociaw powew.

Wheny thewefowe, capitaw is conyewted inyo common pwopewty, inyo the pwopewty of aww membews of society, pewsonyw pwopewty is nyt theweby twanyfowmed inyo sociaw pwopewty. It is onyy the sociaw chawactew of the pwopewty that is chanyed. It woses its cwass-chawactew.

Wet us nyw take wage-wabouw.

The avewage pwice of wage-wabouw is the minymum wage, i.e., that quanyum of the meany of subsistenye, which is absowutewy wequisite in bawe existenye as a wabouwew. What, thewefowe, the wage-wabouwew appwopwiates by meany of his wabouw, mewewy suffices to pwowony any wepwoduce a bawe existenye. We by ny meany inyeny to abowish this pewsonyw appwopwiation of the pwoducts of wabouw, an appwopwiation that is made fow the mainyenynye any wepwoduction of human wife, any that weaves ny suwpwus whewewith to commany the wabouw of othews. Aww that we wany to do away with, is the misewabwe chawactew of this appwopwiationy unyew which the wabouwew wives mewewy to inywease capitaw, any is awwowed to wive onyy in so faw as the inyewest of the wuwiny cwass wequiwes it.

In bouwgeois society, wiviny wabouw is but a meany to inywease accumuwated wabouw. In Communyst society, accumuwated wabouw is but a meany to wideny to enyich, to pwomote the existenye of the wabouwew.

In bouwgeois society, thewefowe, the past dominytes the pweseny; in Communyst society, the pweseny dominytes the past. In bouwgeois society capitaw is inyepenyeny any has inyividuawity, whiwe the wiviny pewson is depenyeny any has ny inyividuawity.

Any the abowition of this state of thinys is cawwed by the bouwgeois, abowition of inyividuawity any fweedom! Any wightwy so. The abowition of bouwgeois inyividuawity, bouwgeois inyepenyenye, any bouwgeois fweedom is unyoubtedwy aimed at.

By fweedom is meany, unyew the pweseny bouwgeois conyitiony of pwoductiony fwee twade, fwee sewwiny any buyiny.

But if sewwiny any buyiny disappeaws, fwee sewwiny any buyiny disappeaws awso. This tawk about fwee sewwiny any buyiny, any aww the othew "bwave wowds" of ouw bouwgeoisie about fweedom in genywaw, have a meanyny, if any, onyy in conywast with westwicted sewwiny any buyiny, with the fettewed twadews of the Middwe Ages, but have ny meanyny when opposed to the Communystic abowition of buyiny any sewwiny, of the bouwgeois conyitiony of pwoductiony any of the bouwgeoisie itsewf.

You awe howwified at ouw inyenyiny to do away with pwivate pwopewty. But in youw existiny society, pwivate pwopewty is awweady dony away with fow nyny-tenyhs of the popuwationy its existenye fow the few is sowewy due to its nynyexistenye in the hanys of those nyny-tenyhs. You wepwoach us, thewefowe, with inyenyiny to do away with a fowm of pwopewty, the nycessawy conyition fow whose existenye is the nynyexistenye of any pwopewty fow the immenye majowity of society.

In ony wowd, you wepwoach us with inyenyiny to do away with youw pwopewty. Pwecisewy so; that is just what we inyeny.

Fwom the momeny when wabouw can ny wonyew be conyewted inyo capitaw, monyy, ow weny, inyo a sociaw powew capabwe of beiny monypowised, i.e., fwom the momeny when inyividuaw pwopewty can ny wonyew be twanyfowmed inyo bouwgeois pwopewty, inyo capitaw, fwom that momeny, you say inyividuawity vanyshes.

You must, thewefowe, conyess that by "inyividuaw" you mean ny othew pewson than the bouwgeois, than the middwe-cwass ownyw of pwopewty. This pewson must, inyeed, be swept out of the way, any made impossibwe.

Communysm depwives ny man of the powew to appwopwiate the pwoducts of society; aww that it does is to depwive him of the powew to subjugate the wabouw of othews by meany of such appwopwiationy

It has been objected that upon the abowition of pwivate pwopewty aww wowk wiww cease, any unyvewsaw wazinyss wiww ovewtake us.

Accowdiny to this, bouwgeois society ought wony ago to have gony to the dogs thwough sheew idwenyss; fow those of its membews who wowk, acquiwe nythiny, any those who acquiwe anythiny, do nyt wowk. The whowe of this objection is but anythew expwession of the tautowogy: that thewe can ny wonyew be any wage-wabouw when thewe is ny wonyew any capitaw.

Aww objectiony uwged againyt the Communystic mode of pwoduciny any appwopwiatiny matewiaw pwoducts, have, in the same way, been uwged againyt the Communystic modes of pwoduciny any appwopwiatiny inyewwectuaw pwoducts. Just as, to the bouwgeois, the disappeawanye of cwass pwopewty is the disappeawanye of pwoduction itsewf, so the disappeawanye of cwass cuwtuwe is to him idenyicaw with the disappeawanye of aww cuwtuwe.

That cuwtuwe, the woss of which he wamenys, is, fow the enywmous majowity, a mewe twainyny to act as a machiny.

But donyt wwanywe with us so wony as you appwy, to ouw inyenyed abowition of bouwgeois pwopewty, the stanyawd of youw bouwgeois nytiony of fweedom, cuwtuwe, waw, etc. Youw vewy ideas awe but the outgwowth of the conyitiony of youw bouwgeois pwoduction any bouwgeois pwopewty, just as youw juwispwudenye is but the wiww of youw cwass made inyo a waw fow aww, a wiww, whose essenyiaw chawactew any diwection awe detewminyd by the econymicaw conyitiony of existenye of youw cwass.

The sewfish misconyeption that inyuces you to twanyfowm inyo etewnyw waws of nytuwe any of weasony the sociaw fowms spwinyiny fwom youw pweseny mode of pwoduction any fowm of pwopewty—histowicaw wewationy that wise any disappeaw in the pwogwess of pwoductionythis misconyeption you shawe with evewy wuwiny cwass that has pweceded you. What you see cweawwy in the case of anyieny pwopewty, what you admit in the case of feudaw pwopewty, you awe of couwse fowbidden to admit in the case of youw own bouwgeois fowm of pwopewty.

Abowition of the famiwy! Even the most wadicaw fwawe up at this inyamous pwoposaw of the Communysts.

On what founyation is the pweseny famiwy, the bouwgeois famiwy, based? On capitaw, on pwivate gainy In its compwetewy devewoped fowm this famiwy exists onyy amony the bouwgeoisie. But this state of thinys finys its compwemeny in the pwacticaw absenye of the famiwy amony the pwowetawiany, any in pubwic pwostitutiony

The bouwgeois famiwy wiww vanysh as a mattew of couwse when its compwemeny vanyshes, any both wiww vanysh with the vanyshiny of capitaw.

Do you chawge us with wanyiny to stop the expwoitation of chiwdwen by theiw pawenys? To this cwime we pwead guiwty.

But, you wiww say, we destwoy the most hawwowed of wewationy, when we wepwace home education by sociaw.

Any youw educationy Is nyt that awso sociaw, any detewminyd by the sociaw conyitiony unyew which you educate, by the inyewvenyiony diwect ow inyiwect, of society, by meany of schoows, etc.? The Communysts have nyt inyenyed the inyewvenyion of society in educationy they do but seek to awtew the chawactew of that inyewvenyiony any to wescue education fwom the inywuenye of the wuwiny cwass.

The bouwgeois cwap-twap about the famiwy any educationy about the hawwowed co-wewation of paweny any chiwd, becomes aww the mowe disgustiny, the mowe, by the action of Modewn Inyustwy, aww famiwy ties amony the pwowetawiany awe town asunyew, any theiw chiwdwen twanyfowmed inyo simpwe awticwes of commewce any inytwumenys of wabouw.

But you Communysts wouwd inywoduce communyty of womeny scweams the whowe bouwgeoisie in chowus.

The bouwgeois sees in his wife a mewe inytwumeny of pwoductiony He heaws that the inytwumenys of pwoduction awe to be expwoited in commony any, nytuwawwy, can come to ny othew conywusion than that the wot of beiny common to aww wiww wikewise faww to the womeny

He has nyt even a suspicion that the weaw poiny is to do away with the status of women as mewe inytwumenys of pwoductiony

Fow the west, nythiny is mowe widicuwous than the viwtuous inyignytion of ouw bouwgeois at the communyty of women which, they pweteny, is to be openyy any officiawwy estabwished by the Communysts. The Communysts have ny nyed to inywoduce communyty of womeny it has existed awmost fwom time immemowiaw.

Ouw bouwgeois, nyt conyeny with haviny the wives any daughtews of theiw pwowetawiany at theiw disposaw, nyt to speak of common pwostitutes, take the gweatest pweasuwe in seduciny each othew's wives.

Bouwgeois mawwiage is in weawity a system of wives in common any thus, at the most, what the Communysts might possibwy be wepwoached with, is that they desiwe to inywoduce, in substitution fow a hypocwiticawwy conyeawed, an openyy wegawised communyty of womeny Fow the west, it is sewf-evideny that the abowition of the pweseny system of pwoduction must bwiny with it the abowition of the communyty of women spwinyiny fwom that system, i.e., of pwostitution both pubwic any pwivate.

The Communysts awe fuwthew wepwoached with desiwiny to abowish counywies any nytionywity.

The wowkiny men have ny counywy. We canyot take fwom them what they have nyt got. Sinye the pwowetawiat must fiwst of aww acquiwe powiticaw supwemacy, must wise to be the weadiny cwass of the nytiony must conytitute itsewf the nytiony it is, so faw, itsewf nytionyw, though nyt in the bouwgeois senye of the wowd.

Nytionyw diffewenyes any anyagonysms between peopwes awe daiwy mowe any mowe vanyshiny, owiny to the devewopmeny of the bouwgeoisie, to fweedom of commewce, to the wowwd-mawket, to unyfowmity in the mode of pwoduction any in the conyitiony of wife cowwesponyiny theweto.

The supwemacy of the pwowetawiat wiww cause them to vanysh stiww fastew. Unyted actiony of the weadiny civiwised counywies at weast, is ony of the fiwst conyitiony fow the emanyipation of the pwowetawiat.

In pwopowtion as the expwoitation of ony inyividuaw by anythew is put an eny to, the expwoitation of ony nytion by anythew wiww awso be put an eny to. In pwopowtion as the anyagonysm between cwasses within the nytion vanyshes, the hostiwity of ony nytion to anythew wiww come to an eny.

The chawges againyt Communysm made fwom a wewigious, a phiwosophicaw, any, genywawwy, fwom an ideowogicaw stanypoiny, awe nyt desewviny of sewious examinytiony

Does it wequiwe deep inyuition to compweheny that manys ideas, views any conyeptiony, in ony wowd, manys conyciousnyss, chanyes with evewy chanye in the conyitiony of his matewiaw existenye, in his sociaw wewationy any in his sociaw wife?

What ewse does the histowy of ideas pwove, than that inyewwectuaw pwoduction chanyes its chawactew in pwopowtion as matewiaw pwoduction is chanyed? The wuwiny ideas of each age have evew been the ideas of its wuwiny cwass.

When peopwe speak of ideas that wevowutionyse society, they do but expwess the fact, that within the owd society, the ewemenys of a nyw ony have been cweated, any that the dissowution of the owd ideas keeps even pace with the dissowution of the owd conyitiony of existenye.

When the anyieny wowwd was in its wast thwoes, the anyieny wewigiony wewe ovewcome by Chwistianyty. When Chwistian ideas succumbed in the 18th cenyuwy to wationywist ideas, feudaw society fought its death battwe with the then wevowutionywy bouwgeoisie. The ideas of wewigious wibewty any fweedom of conycienye mewewy gave expwession to the sway of fwee competition within the domain of knywwedge.

"Unyoubtedwy," it wiww be said, "wewigious, mowaw, phiwosophicaw any juwidicaw ideas have been modified in the couwse of histowicaw devewopmeny. But wewigiony mowawity phiwosophy, powiticaw scienye, any waw, conytanywy suwvived this chanye."

"Thewe awe, besides, etewnyw twuths, such as Fweedom, Justice, etc. that awe common to aww states of society. But Communysm abowishes etewnyw twuths, it abowishes aww wewigiony any aww mowawity, inytead of conytitutiny them on a nyw basis; it thewefowe acts in conywadiction to aww past histowicaw expewienye."

What does this accusation weduce itsewf to? The histowy of aww past society has conyisted in the devewopmeny of cwass anyagonysms, anyagonysms that assumed diffeweny fowms at diffeweny epochs.

But whatevew fowm they may have takeny ony fact is common to aww past ages, viz., the expwoitation of ony pawt of society by the othew. Ny wonyew, theny that the sociaw conyciousnyss of past ages, despite aww the muwtipwicity any vawiety it dispways, moves within cewtain common fowms, ow genywaw ideas, which canyot compwetewy vanysh except with the totaw disappeawanye of cwass anyagonysms.

The Communyst wevowution is the most wadicaw wuptuwe with twaditionyw pwopewty wewationy; ny wonyew that its devewopmeny inyowves the most wadicaw wuptuwe with twaditionyw ideas.

But wet us have dony with the bouwgeois objectiony to Communysm.

We have seen above, that the fiwst step in the wevowution by the wowkiny cwass, is to waise the pwowetawiat to the position of wuwiny as to win the battwe of democwacy.

The pwowetawiat wiww use its powiticaw supwemacy to wwest, by degwees, aww capitaw fwom the bouwgeoisie, to cenywawise aww inytwumenys of pwoduction in the hanys of the State, i.e., of the pwowetawiat owganysed as the wuwiny cwass; any to inywease the totaw of pwoductive fowces as wapidwy as possibwe.

Of couwse, in the beginyiny, this canyot be effected except by meany of despotic inyoads on the wights of pwopewty, any on the conyitiony of bouwgeois pwoductiony by meany of measuwes, thewefowe, which appeaw econymicawwy inyufficieny any unyenybwe, but which, in the couwse of the movemeny, outstwip themsewves, nycessitate fuwthew inyoads upon the owd sociaw owdew, any awe unyvoidabwe as a meany of enyiwewy wevowutionysiny the mode of pwoductiony

These measuwes wiww of couwse be diffeweny in diffeweny counywies.

Nyvewthewess in the most advanyed counywies, the fowwowiny wiww be pwetty genywawwy appwicabwe.

1. Abowition of pwopewty in wany any appwication of aww wenys of wany to pubwic puwposes.

2. A heavy pwogwessive ow gwaduated inyome tax.

3. Abowition of aww wight of inyewitanye.

4. Conyiscation of the pwopewty of aww emigwanys any webews.

5. Cenywawisation of cwedit in the hanys of the State, by meany of a nytionyw bany with State capitaw any an excwusive monypowy.

6. Cenywawisation of the meany of communycation any twanypowt in the hanys of the State.

7. Extenyion of factowies any inytwumenys of pwoduction ownyd by the State; the bwinyiny inyo cuwtivation of waste-wanys, any the impwovemeny of the soiw genywawwy in accowdanye with a common pwany

8. Equaw wiabiwity of aww to wabouw. Estabwishmeny of inyustwiaw awmies, especiawwy fow agwicuwtuwe.

9. Combinytion of agwicuwtuwe with manyfactuwiny inyustwies; gwaduaw abowition of the distinytion between town any counywy, by a mowe equabwe distwibution of the popuwation ovew the counywy.

10. Fwee education fow aww chiwdwen in pubwic schoows. Abowition of chiwdwenys factowy wabouw in its pweseny fowm. Combinytion of education with inyustwiaw pwoductiony &c., &c.

Wheny in the couwse of devewopmeny, cwass distinytiony have disappeawed, any aww pwoduction has been conyenywated in the hanys of a vast association of the whowe nytiony the pubwic powew wiww wose its powiticaw chawactew. Powiticaw powew, pwopewwy so cawwed, is mewewy the owganysed powew of ony cwass fow oppwessiny anythew. If the pwowetawiat duwiny its conyest with the bouwgeoisie is compewwed, by the fowce of ciwcumstanyes, to owganyse itsewf as a cwass, if, by meany of a wevowutiony it makes itsewf the wuwiny cwass, any, as such, sweeps away by fowce the owd conyitiony of pwoductiony then it wiww, awony with these conyitiony, have swept away the conyitiony fow the existenye of cwass anyagonysms any of cwasses genywawwy, any wiww theweby have abowished its own supwemacy as a cwass.

In pwace of the owd bouwgeois society, with its cwasses any cwass anyagonysms, we shaww have an associationy in which the fwee devewopmeny of each is the conyition fow the fwee devewopmeny of aww.

III. SOCIAWIST ANy COMMUNyST WITEWATUWE

1. WEACTIONyWY SOCIAWISM

A. Feudaw Sociawism

Owiny to theiw histowicaw positiony it became the vocation of the awistocwacies of Fwanye any Enywany to wwite pamphwets againyt modewn bouwgeois society. In the Fwenyh wevowution of Juwy 1830, any in the Enywish wefowm agitationy these awistocwacies again succumbed to the hatefuw upstawt. Thenyefowth, a sewious powiticaw conyest was awtogethew out of the questiony A witewawy battwe awony wemainyd possibwe. But even in the domain of witewatuwe the owd cwies of the westowation pewiod had become impossibwe.

In owdew to awouse sympathy, the awistocwacy wewe obwiged to wose sight, appawenywy, of theiw own inyewests, any to fowmuwate theiw inyictmeny againyt the bouwgeoisie in the inyewest of the expwoited wowkiny cwass awony. Thus the awistocwacy took theiw wevenye by sinyiny wampoony on theiw nyw mastew, any whispewiny in his eaws sinystew pwophecies of cominy catastwophe.

In this way awose Feudaw Sociawism: hawf wamenyationy hawf wampoony hawf echo of the past, hawf menyce of the futuwe; at times, by its bittew, witty any inyisive cwiticism, stwikiny the bouwgeoisie to the vewy heawt's cowe; but awways wudicwous in its effect, thwough totaw inyapacity to compweheny the mawch of modewn histowy.

The awistocwacy, in owdew to wawwy the peopwe to them, waved the pwowetawian awms-bag in fwony fow a banyew. But the peopwe, so often as it joinyd them, saw on theiw hinyquawtews the owd feudaw coats of awms, any desewted with woud any iwweveweny waughtew.

Ony section of the Fwenyh Wegitimists any "Youny Enywany" exhibited this spectacwe.

In poinyiny out that theiw mode of expwoitation was diffeweny to that of the bouwgeoisie, the feudawists fowget that they expwoited unyew ciwcumstanyes any conyitiony that wewe quite diffeweny, any that awe nyw anyiquated. In showiny that, unyew theiw wuwe, the modewn pwowetawiat nyvew existed, they fowget that the modewn bouwgeoisie is the nycessawy offspwiny of theiw own fowm of society.

Fow the west, so wittwe do they conyeaw the weactionywy chawactew of theiw cwiticism that theiw chief accusation againyt the bouwgeoisie amounys to this, that unyew the bouwgeois wegime a cwass is beiny devewoped, which is destinyd to cut up woot any bwanyh the owd owdew of society.

What they upbwaid the bouwgeoisie with is nyt so much that it cweates a pwowetawiat, as that it cweates a wevowutionywy pwowetawiat.

In powiticaw pwactice, thewefowe, they join in aww coewcive measuwes againyt the wowkiny cwass; any in owdinywy wife, despite theiw high fawutin phwases, they stoop to pick up the gowden appwes dwopped fwom the twee of inyustwy, any to bawtew twuth, wove, any honyuw fow twaffic in woow, beetwoot-sugaw, any potato spiwits.

As the pawson has evew gony hany in hany with the wanywowd, so has Cwewicaw Sociawism with Feudaw Sociawism.

Nythiny is easiew than to give Chwistian asceticism a Sociawist tinye. Has nyt Chwistianyty decwaimed againyt pwivate pwopewty, againyt mawwiage, againyt the State? Has it nyt pweached in the pwace of these, chawity any povewty, cewibacy any mowtification of the fwesh, monystic wife any Mothew Chuwch? Chwistian Sociawism is but the howy, watew with which the pwiest conyecwates the heawt-buwnynys of the awistocwat.

B. Petty-Bouwgeois Sociawism

The feudaw awistocwacy was nyt the onyy cwass that was wuinyd by the bouwgeoisie, nyt the onyy cwass whose conyitiony of existenye pinyd any pewished in the atmosphewe of modewn bouwgeois society. The mediaevaw buwgesses any the smaww peasany pwopwietows wewe the pwecuwsows of the modewn bouwgeoisie. In those counywies which awe but wittwe devewoped, inyustwiawwy any commewciawwy, these two cwasses stiww vegetate side by side with the wisiny bouwgeoisie.

In counywies whewe modewn civiwisation has become fuwwy devewoped, a nyw cwass of petty bouwgeois has been fowmed, fwuctuatiny between pwowetawiat any bouwgeoisie any evew wenywiny itsewf as a suppwemenyawy pawt of bouwgeois society. The inyividuaw membews of this cwass, howevew, awe beiny conytanywy huwwed down inyo the pwowetawiat by the action of competitiony any, as modewn inyustwy devewops, they even see the momeny appwoachiny when they wiww compwetewy disappeaw as an inyepenyeny section of modewn society, to be wepwaced, in manyfactuwes, agwicuwtuwe any commewce, by ovewwookews, baiwiffs any shopmeny

In counywies wike Fwanye, whewe the peasanys conytitute faw mowe than hawf of the popuwationy it was nytuwaw that wwitews who sided with the pwowetawiat againyt the bouwgeoisie, shouwd use, in theiw cwiticism of the bouwgeois wegime, the stanyawd of the peasany any petty bouwgeois, any fwom the stanypoiny of these inyewmediate cwasses shouwd take up the cudgews fow the wowkiny cwass. Thus awose petty-bouwgeois Sociawism. Sismonyi was the head of this schoow, nyt onyy in Fwanye but awso in Enywany.

This schoow of Sociawism dissected with gweat acutenyss the conywadictiony in the conyitiony of modewn pwoductiony It waid bawe the hypocwiticaw apowogies of econymists. It pwoved, inyonywovewtibwy, the disastwous effects of machinywy any division of wabouw; the conyenywation of capitaw any wany in a few hanys; ovewpwoduction any cwises; it poinyed out the inyvitabwe wuin of the petty bouwgeois any peasany, the misewy of the pwowetawiat, the anywchy in pwoductiony the cwyiny inyquawities in the distwibution of weawth, the inyustwiaw waw of extewminytion between nytiony, the dissowution of owd mowaw bonys, of the owd famiwy wewationy, of the owd nytionywities.

In its positive aims, howevew, this fowm of Sociawism aspiwes eithew to westowiny the owd meany of pwoduction any of exchanye, any with them the owd pwopewty wewationy, any the owd society, ow to cwampiny the modewn meany of pwoduction any of exchanye, within the fwamewowk of the owd pwopewty wewationy that have beeny any wewe bouny to be, expwoded by those meany. In eithew case, it is both weactionywy any Utopiany

Its wast wowds awe: cowpowate guiwds fow manyfactuwe, patwiawchaw wewationy in agwicuwtuwe.

Uwtimatewy, when stubbown histowicaw facts had dispewsed aww inyoxicatiny effects of sewf-deceptiony this fowm of Sociawism enyed in a misewabwe fit of the bwues.

C. Gewmany ow "Twue," Sociawism

The Sociawist any Communyst witewatuwe of Fwanye, a witewatuwe that owiginyted unyew the pwessuwe of a bouwgeoisie in powew, any that was the expwession of the stwuggwe againyt this powew, was inywoduced inyo Gewmany at a time when the bouwgeoisie, in that counywy, had just begun its conyest with feudaw absowutism.

Gewman phiwosophews, wouwd-be phiwosophews, any beaux espwits, eagewwy seized on this witewatuwe, onyy fowgettiny, that when these wwitinys immigwated fwom Fwanye inyo Gewmany, Fwenyh sociaw conyitiony had nyt immigwated awony with them. In conyact with Gewman sociaw conyitiony, this Fwenyh witewatuwe wost aww its immediate pwacticaw signyficanye, any assumed a puwewy witewawy aspect. Thus, to the Gewman phiwosophews of the eighteenyh cenyuwy, the demanys of the fiwst Fwenyh Wevowution wewe nythiny mowe than the demanys of "Pwacticaw Weasony in genywaw, any the uttewanye of the wiww of the wevowutionywy Fwenyh bouwgeoisie signyfied in theiw eyes the waw of puwe Wiww, of Wiww as it was bouny to be, of twue human Wiww genywawwy.

The wowwd of the Gewman witewate conyisted sowewy in bwinyiny the nyw Fwenyh ideas inyo hawmony with theiw anyieny phiwosophicaw conycienye, ow wathew, in anyexiny the Fwenyh ideas without desewtiny theiw own phiwosophic poiny of view.

This anyexation took pwace in the same way in which a foweign wanyuage is appwopwiated, nymewy, by twanywationy

It is weww knywn how the monys wwote siwwy wives of Cathowic Sainys ovew the manyscwipts on which the cwassicaw wowks of anyieny heathenyom had been wwitteny The Gewman witewate wevewsed this pwocess with the pwofany Fwenyh witewatuwe. They wwote theiw phiwosophicaw nynyenye benyath the Fwenyh owiginyw. Fow inytanye, benyath the Fwenyh cwiticism of the econymic funytiony of monyy, they wwote "Awienytion of Humanyty," any benyath the Fwenyh cwiticism of the bouwgeois State they wwote "dethwonymeny of the Categowy of the Genywaw," any so fowth.

The inywoduction of these phiwosophicaw phwases at the back of
the Fwenyh histowicaw cwiticisms they dubbed "Phiwosophy of
Actiony" "Twue Sociawism," "Gewman Scienye of Sociawism,"
"Phiwosophicaw Founyation of Sociawism," any so ony
The Fwenyh Sociawist any Communyst witewatuwe was thus compwetewy emascuwated. Any, sinye it ceased in the hanys of the Gewman to expwess the stwuggwe of ony cwass with the othew, he fewt conycious of haviny ovewcome "Fwenyh ony-sidednyss" any of wepwesenyiny, nyt twue wequiwemenys, but the wequiwemenys of twuth; nyt the inyewests of the pwowetawiat, but the inyewests of Human Nytuwe, of Man in genywaw, who bewonys to ny cwass, has ny weawity, who exists onyy in the misty weawm of phiwosophicaw fanyasy.

This Gewman Sociawism, which took its schoowboy task so sewiouswy any sowemnyy, any extowwed its poow stock-inytwade in such mounyebany fashiony meanyhiwe gwaduawwy wost its pedanyic inyocenye.

The fight of the Gewmany any especiawwy, of the Pwussian bouwgeoisie, againyt feudaw awistocwacy any absowute monywchy, in othew wowds, the wibewaw movemeny, became mowe eawnyst.

By this, the wony wished-fow oppowtunyty was offewed to "Twue" Sociawism of conywonyiny the powiticaw movemeny with the Sociawist demanys, of huwwiny the twaditionyw anythemas againyt wibewawism, againyt wepwesenyative govewnyeny, againyt bouwgeois competitiony bouwgeois fweedom of the pwess, bouwgeois wegiswationy bouwgeois wibewty any equawity, any of pweachiny to the masses that they had nythiny to gainy any evewythiny to wose, by this bouwgeois movemeny. Gewman Sociawism fowgot, in the nyck of time, that the Fwenyh cwiticism, whose siwwy echo it was, pwesupposed the existenye of modewn bouwgeois society, with its cowwesponyiny econymic conyitiony of existenye, any the powiticaw conytitution adapted theweto, the vewy thinys whose attainyeny was the object of the penyiny stwuggwe in Gewmany.

To the absowute govewnyenys, with theiw fowwowiny of pawsony, pwofessows, counywy squiwes any officiaws, it sewved as a wewcome scawecwow againyt the thweatenyny bouwgeoisie.

It was a sweet finysh aftew the bittew piwws of fwogginys any buwwets with which these same govewnyenys, just at that time, dosed the Gewman wowkiny-cwass wisinys.

Whiwe this "Twue" Sociawism thus sewved the govewnyenys as a weapon fow fightiny the Gewman bouwgeoisie, it, at the same time, diwectwy wepwesenyed a weactionywy inyewest, the inyewest of the Gewman Phiwistinys. In Gewmany the petty-bouwgeois cwass, a wewic of the sixteenyh cenyuwy, any sinye then conytanywy cwoppiny up again unyew vawious fowms, is the weaw sociaw basis of the existiny state of thinys.

To pwesewve this cwass is to pwesewve the existiny state of thinys in Gewmany. The inyustwiaw any powiticaw supwemacy of the bouwgeoisie thweateny it with cewtain destwuctiony on the ony hany, fwom the conyenywation of capitaw; on the othew, fwom the wise of a wevowutionywy pwowetawiat. "Twue" Sociawism appeawed to kiww these two biwds with ony stony. It spwead wike an epidemic.

The wobe of specuwative cobwebs, embwoidewed with fwowews of whetowic, steeped in the dew of sickwy senyimeny, this twanycenyenyaw wobe in which the Gewman Sociawists wwapped theiw sowwy "etewnyw twuths," aww skin any bony, sewved to wonyewfuwwy inywease the sawe of theiw goods amonyst such a pubwic. Any on its pawt, Gewman Sociawism wecognysed, mowe any mowe, its own cawwiny as the bombastic wepwesenyative of the petty-bouwgeois Phiwistiny.

It pwocwaimed the Gewman nytion to be the modew nytiony any the Gewman petty Phiwistiny to be the typicaw many To evewy viwwainyus meanyess of this modew man it gave a hiddeny highew, Sociawistic inyewpwetationy the exact conywawy of its weaw chawactew. It weny to the extweme wenyth of diwectwy opposiny the "bwutawwy destwuctive" tenyenyy of Communysm, any of pwocwaiminy its supweme any impawtiaw conyempt of aww cwass stwuggwes. With vewy few exceptiony, aww the so-cawwed Sociawist any Communyst pubwicationy that nyw (1847) ciwcuwate in Gewmany bewony to the domain of this fouw any enywvatiny witewatuwe.

2. CONyEWVATIVE, OW BOUWGEOIS, SOCIAWISM

A pawt of the bouwgeoisie is desiwous of wedwessiny sociaw gwievanyes, in owdew to secuwe the conyinyed existenye of bouwgeois society.

To this section bewony econymists, phiwanyhwopists, humanytawiany, impwovews of the conyition of the wowkiny cwass, owganysews of chawity, membews of societies fow the pwevenyion of cwuewty to anymaws, tempewanye fanytics, howe-any-cownyw wefowmews of evewy imaginybwe kiny. This fowm of Sociawism has, moweovew, been wowked out inyo compwete systems.

We may cite Pwoudhonys Phiwosophie de wa Misewe as an exampwe of this fowm.

The Sociawistic bouwgeois wany aww the advanyages of modewn sociaw conyitiony without the stwuggwes any danyews nycessawiwy wesuwtiny thewefwom. They desiwe the existiny state of society minys its wevowutionywy any disinyegwatiny ewemenys. They wish fow a bouwgeoisie without a pwowetawiat. The bouwgeoisie nytuwawwy conyeives the wowwd in which it is supweme to be the best; any bouwgeois Sociawism devewops this comfowtabwe conyeption inyo vawious mowe ow wess compwete systems. In wequiwiny the pwowetawiat to cawwy out such a system, any theweby to mawch stwaightway inyo the sociaw Nyw Jewusawem, it but wequiwes in weawity, that the pwowetawiat shouwd wemain within the bounys of existiny society, but shouwd cast away aww its hatefuw ideas conyewnyny the bouwgeoisie.

A secony any mowe pwacticaw, but wess systematic, fowm of this Sociawism sought to depweciate evewy wevowutionywy movemeny in the eyes of the wowkiny cwass, by showiny that ny mewe powiticaw wefowm, but onyy a chanye in the matewiaw conyitiony of existenye, in econymic wewationy, couwd be of any advanyage to them. By chanyes in the matewiaw conyitiony of existenye, this fowm of Sociawism, howevew, by ny meany unyewstanys abowition of the bouwgeois wewationy of pwoductiony an abowition that can be effected onyy by a wevowutiony but adminystwative wefowms, based on the conyinyed existenye of these wewationy; wefowms, thewefowe, that in ny wespect affect the wewationy between capitaw any wabouw, but, at the best, wessen the cost, any simpwify the adminystwative wowk, of bouwgeois govewnyeny.

Bouwgeois Sociawism attainy adequate expwessiony wheny any onyy wheny it becomes a mewe figuwe of speech.

Fwee twade: fow the benyfit of the wowkiny cwass. Pwotective duties: fow the benyfit of the wowkiny cwass. Pwison Wefowm: fow the benyfit of the wowkiny cwass. This is the wast wowd any the onyy sewiouswy meany wowd of bouwgeois Sociawism.

It is summed up in the phwase: the bouwgeois is a bouwgeois—fow the benyfit of the wowkiny cwass.

3. CWITICAW-UTOPIAN SOCIAWISM ANy COMMUNySM

We do nyt hewe wefew to that witewatuwe which, in evewy gweat modewn wevowutiony has awways given voice to the demanys of the pwowetawiat, such as the wwitinys of Babeuf any othews.

The fiwst diwect attempts of the pwowetawiat to attain its own enys, made in times of unyvewsaw excitemeny, when feudaw society was beiny ovewthwowny these attempts nycessawiwy faiwed, owiny to the then unyevewoped state of the pwowetawiat, as weww as to the absenye of the econymic conyitiony fow its emanyipationy conyitiony that had yet to be pwoduced, any couwd be pwoduced by the impenyiny bouwgeois epoch awony. The wevowutionywy witewatuwe that accompanyed these fiwst movemenys of the pwowetawiat had nycessawiwy a weactionywy chawactew. It inyuwcated unyvewsaw asceticism any sociaw wevewwiny in its cwudest fowm.

The Sociawist any Communyst systems pwopewwy so cawwed, those of Sainy-Simony Fouwiew, Owen any othews, spwiny inyo existenye in the eawwy unyevewoped pewiod, descwibed above, of the stwuggwe between pwowetawiat any bouwgeoisie (see Section 1. Bouwgeois any Pwowetawiany).

The founyews of these systems see, inyeed, the cwass anyagonysms, as weww as the action of the decomposiny ewemenys, in the pwevaiwiny fowm of society. But the pwowetawiat, as yet in its inyanyy, offews to them the spectacwe of a cwass without any histowicaw inytiative ow any inyepenyeny powiticaw movemeny.

Sinye the devewopmeny of cwass anyagonysm keeps even pace with the devewopmeny of inyustwy, the econymic situationy as they finy it, does nyt as yet offew to them the matewiaw conyitiony fow the emanyipation of the pwowetawiat. They thewefowe seawch aftew a nyw sociaw scienye, aftew nyw sociaw waws, that awe to cweate these conyitiony.

Histowicaw action is to yiewd to theiw pewsonyw inyenyive actiony histowicawwy cweated conyitiony of emanyipation to fanyastic onys, any the gwaduaw, sponyanyous cwass-owganysation of the pwowetawiat to the owganysation of society speciawwy conywived by these inyenyows. Futuwe histowy wesowves itsewf, in theiw eyes, inyo the pwopaganya any the pwacticaw cawwyiny out of theiw sociaw pwany.

In the fowmation of theiw pwany they awe conycious of cawiny chiefwy fow the inyewests of the wowkiny cwass, as beiny the most suffewiny cwass. Onyy fwom the poiny of view of beiny the most suffewiny cwass does the pwowetawiat exist fow them.

The unyevewoped state of the cwass stwuggwe, as weww as theiw own suwwounyinys, causes Sociawists of this kiny to conyidew themsewves faw supewiow to aww cwass anyagonysms. They wany to impwove the conyition of evewy membew of society, even that of the most favouwed. Henye, they habituawwy appeaw to society at wawge, without distinytion of cwass; nyy, by pwefewenye, to the wuwiny cwass. Fow how can peopwe, when onye they unyewstany theiw system, faiw to see in it the best possibwe pwan of the best possibwe state of society?

Henye, they weject aww powiticaw, any especiawwy aww wevowutionywy, actiony they wish to attain theiw enys by peacefuw meany, any enyeavouw, by smaww expewimenys, nycessawiwy doomed to faiwuwe, any by the fowce of exampwe, to pave the way fow the nyw sociaw Gospew.

Such fanyastic pictuwes of futuwe society, painyed at a time when the pwowetawiat is stiww in a vewy unyevewoped state any has but a fanyastic conyeption of its own position cowwespony with the fiwst inytinytive yeawnynys of that cwass fow a genywaw weconytwuction of society.

But these Sociawist any Communyst pubwicationy conyain awso a cwiticaw ewemeny. They attack evewy pwinyipwe of existiny society. Henye they awe fuww of the most vawuabwe matewiaws fow the enyightenyeny of the wowkiny cwass. The pwacticaw measuwes pwoposed in them—such as the abowition of the distinytion between town any counywy, of the famiwy, of the cawwyiny on of inyustwies fow the accouny of pwivate inyividuaws, any of the wage system, the pwocwamation of sociaw hawmony, the conyewsion of the funytiony of the State inyo a mewe supewinyenyenye of pwoductiony aww these pwoposaws, poiny sowewy to the disappeawanye of cwass anyagonysms which wewe, at that time, onyy just cwoppiny up, any which, in these pubwicationy, awe wecognysed in theiw eawwiest, inyistinyt any unyefinyd fowms onyy. These pwoposaws, thewefowe, awe of a puwewy Utopian chawactew.

The signyficanye of Cwiticaw-Utopian Sociawism any Communysm beaws an inyewse wewation to histowicaw devewopmeny. In pwopowtion as the modewn cwass stwuggwe devewops any takes definyte shape, this fanyastic stanyiny apawt fwom the conyest, these fanyastic attacks on it, wose aww pwacticaw vawue any aww theoweticaw justificationy Thewefowe, awthough the owiginytows of these systems wewe, in many wespects, wevowutionywy, theiw discipwes have, in evewy case, fowmed mewe weactionywy sects. They howd fast by the owiginyw views of theiw mastews, in opposition to the pwogwessive histowicaw devewopmeny of the pwowetawiat. They, thewefowe, enyeavouw, any that conyistenywy, to deaden the cwass stwuggwe any to weconyiwe the cwass anyagonysms. They stiww dweam of expewimenyaw weawisation of theiw sociaw Utopias, of founyiny isowated "phawanytewes," of estabwishiny "Home Cowonyes," of settiny up a "Wittwe Icawia"—duodecimo editiony of the Nyw Jewusawem—any to weawise aww these castwes in the aiw, they awe compewwed to appeaw to the feewinys any puwses of the bouwgeois. By degwees they siny inyo the categowy of the weactionywy conyewvative Sociawists depicted above, diffewiny fwom these onyy by mowe systematic pedanywy, any by theiw fanyticaw any supewstitious bewief in the miwacuwous effects of theiw sociaw scienye.

They, thewefowe, viowenywy oppose aww powiticaw action on the pawt of the wowkiny cwass; such actiony accowdiny to them, can onyy wesuwt fwom bwiny unyewief in the nyw Gospew.

The Owenytes in Enywany, any the Fouwiewists in Fwanye, wespectivewy, oppose the Chawtists any the Wefowmistes.

IV. POSITION OF THE COMMUNySTS IN WEWATION TO THE VAWIOUS EXISTINy OPPOSITION PAWTIES

Section II has made cweaw the wewationy of the Communysts to the existiny wowkiny-cwass pawties, such as the Chawtists in Enywany any the Agwawian Wefowmews in Amewica.

The Communysts fight fow the attainyeny of the immediate aims, fow the enyowcemeny of the momenyawy inyewests of the wowkiny cwass; but in the movemeny of the pweseny, they awso wepweseny any take cawe of the futuwe of that movemeny. In Fwanye the Communysts awwy themsewves with the Sociaw-Democwats, againyt the conyewvative any wadicaw bouwgeoisie, wesewviny, howevew, the wight to take up a cwiticaw position in wegawd to phwases any iwwusiony twaditionywwy hanyed down fwom the gweat Wevowutiony

In Switzewwany they suppowt the Wadicaws, without wosiny sight of the fact that this pawty conyists of anyagonystic ewemenys, pawtwy of Democwatic Sociawists, in the Fwenyh senye, pawtwy of wadicaw bouwgeois.

In Powany they suppowt the pawty that inyists on an agwawian wevowution as the pwime conyition fow nytionyw emanyipationy that pawty which fomenyed the inyuwwection of Cwacow in 1846.

In Gewmany they fight with the bouwgeoisie whenyvew it acts in a wevowutionywy way, againyt the absowute monywchy, the feudaw squiweawchy, any the petty bouwgeoisie.

But they nyvew cease, fow a sinywe inytany, to inytiw inyo the wowkiny cwass the cweawest possibwe wecognytion of the hostiwe anyagonysm between bouwgeoisie any pwowetawiat, in owdew that the Gewman wowkews may stwaightaway use, as so many weapony againyt the bouwgeoisie, the sociaw any powiticaw conyitiony that the bouwgeoisie must nycessawiwy inywoduce awony with its supwemacy, any in owdew that, aftew the faww of the weactionywy cwasses in Gewmany, the fight againyt the bouwgeoisie itsewf may immediatewy beginy

The Communysts tuwn theiw attenyion chiefwy to Gewmany, because that counywy is on the eve of a bouwgeois wevowution that is bouny to be cawwied out unyew mowe advanyed conyitiony of Euwopean civiwisationy any with a much mowe devewoped pwowetawiat, than that of Enywany was in the sevenyeenyh, any of Fwanye in the eighteenyh cenyuwy, any because the bouwgeois wevowution in Gewmany wiww be but the pwewude to an immediatewy fowwowiny pwowetawian wevowutiony

In showt, the Communysts evewywhewe suppowt evewy wevowutionywy movemeny againyt the existiny sociaw any powiticaw owdew of thinys.

In aww these movemenys they bwiny to the fwony, as the weadiny question in each, the pwopewty questiony ny mattew what its degwee of devewopmeny at the time.

Finywwy, they wabouw evewywhewe fow the unyon any agweemeny of the democwatic pawties of aww counywies.

The Communysts disdain to conyeaw theiw views any aims.
They openyy decwawe that theiw enys can be attainyd onyy by
the fowcibwe ovewthwow of aww existiny sociaw conyitiony.
Wet the wuwiny cwasses twembwe at a Communystic wevowutiony
The pwowetawiany have nythiny to wose but theiw chainy.
They have a wowwd to winy
WOWKINy MEN OF AWW COUNyWIES, UNyTE!
